#summary An Overview of the esda module in PySAL
#sidebar TableOfContents

= Introduction =
The module {{{esda}}} provides classes to perform Exploratory Spatial Data Analysis (ESDA) in PySAL.

*NOTE* All the examples below assume you have loaded the example data into Python. Do it with the following code (assuming you are on the directory '/pysal/examples'):

{{{
>>> import numpy as N
>>> import pysal
# Read the weights matrix as W object
>>> W=pysal.open('desmith.gal')._read()

# Read data
>>> y=pysal.open('desmith.txt')
# Get the column 'z' of the table
>>> y=y._get_col('z')
# Make it a numpy array
>>> y=N.array(y)
}}}

For more info on reading data into PySAL, see FileIO.

= Classes =

== Geary ==
*{{{class Geary}}}*

It computes Global Geary C autorcorrelation statistic.

===Arguments===
 * y: n`*`1 array
 * w: weight instance assumed to be aligned with y
 * transformation: weights transformation, default is row-standardized (`W`). Other options include:
  * `B`: binary
  * `D`: doubly-standardized
  * `U`: untransformed (general weights)
  * `V`: variance-stabilizing
 * permutations: number of random permutations for calculation of
pseudo-p_values

===Attributes===
 * y: original variable
 * w: original w object
 * permutation: number of permutations
 * C: value of statistic
 *EC: expected value
 *VC: variance of G under normality assumption
 *z_norm: z-statistic for C under normality assumption
 *z_rand: z-statistic for C under randomization assumption
 *p_norm: p-value under normality assumption (one-tailed)
 *p_rand: p-value under randomization assumption (one-tailed)

(if permutations>0)

 *sim: vector of I values for permutated samples
 *p_sim: p-value based on permutations
 *EC_sim: average value of C from permutations
 *VC_sim: variance of C from permutations
 *seC_sim: standard deviation of C under permutations.
 *z_sim: standardized C based on permutations
 *p_z_sim: p-value based on standard normal approximation from
permutations

===References===
 * Geary, R.C. (1954). [http://www.jstor.org/pss/2986645 The Contiguity Ratio and Statistical Mapping]. 5. The Incorporated Statistician. pp. 115–145
 * Cliff, A. D., Ord, J. K. 1981 Spatial processes, Pion, p. 17
 * [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geary%27s_C Wikipedia]

===Example===
{{{
>>> from pysal.esda.geary import Geary
>>> c=Geary(y,W)
>>> c.C
1.0306280397350873
>>> c.EC
1.0
>>> c.z_norm
0.12478140903940312
>>> c.z_rand
0.11778731158293086
>>> c.p_norm
0.39584849345282647
>>> c.p_rand
0.39618442415010757
>>> c.p_sim
0.41699999999999998
>>> c.EC_sim
0.99897710985735588
>>> c.VC_sim
0.060532146040864848
>>> c.seC_sim
0.24603281496756657
>>> c.z_sim
0.12864515606141336
>>> c.p_z_sim
0.39565473818765856
>>> 
}}}

== Moran ==
*{{{Moran}}}*

*{{{Moran_BV}}}*

*{{{Moran_Local}}}*