.. _introduction

============
Introduction
============


As PySAL is an open source project, much of the initial effort has been
focused on developing the core source code. As such, time for preparing user
documentation has been rather sparse. This situation should change in the
coming months as we are in the process of adding a number of short
:doc:`tutorials </tutorials>`
that show users how to work with PySAL code for their analyses.

=======
History
=======
PySAL grew out of a collaborative effort between Luc Anselin's group
previously located at the University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, and Serge
Rey who was at San Diego State University.  It was born out of a recognition that
the respective projects at the two institutions,  `PySpace
<http://geodacenter.asu.edu/pyspaceimg>`_ (Anselin) and `STARS
<http://regionalanalysislab.org/index.php/Main/STARS>`_ - Space Time Analysis
of Regional Systems (Rey), could benefit from a shared analytical core, since
this would limit code duplication and free up additional developer time to
focused on enhancements the applications.

This recognition also came at a time when Python was starting to make major in
road in geographic information systems as represented by projects such as the
Python Cartographic Library, shapely, ESRI's adoption of Python as a scripting
language and XX, among others. At the same time there was a dearth of Python
modules for spatial statistics, spatial econometrics, location modeling and
other areas of spatial analysis, and the role for PySAL was then expanded
beyond its support of STARS and PySpace to provide a library of core spatial
analytical functions that could support the next generation of spatial
analysis applications.. 

As of 2008 the new home for PySAL is the GeoDa Center for Geospatial Analysis
and Computation at Arizona State University where both Anselin and Rey are now
located.







=================================
Research Papers and Presentations
=================================

    * Rey, Sergio J. and Luc Anselin. (2009) `PySAL: A Python Library for Spatial Analysis and Geocomputation <http://www.archive.org/details/scipy09_day2_10-Serge_Rey>`_. (Movie) Python for Scientific Computing. Caltech, Pasadena, CA August 2009.
    * Rey, Sergio J. (2009). `Show Me the Code: Spatial Analysis and Open Source <http://www.springerlink.com/content/91u84l471h043282/>`_. *Journal of Geographical Systems* 11: 191-2007.
    * Rey, Sergio J. and Luc Anselin. (2007) PySAL: A Python Library of Spatial Analytical Methods. The Review of Regional Studies. 37(1): 5-27.
    * Rey, S.J., Anselin, L., & M. Hwang. (2008). Dynamic Manipulation of Spatial Weights Using Web Services. GeoDa Center Working Paper 2008-12.
